=============
Release notes
=============

.. highlight:: text

NethServer 8 releases

- List of `known bugs <https://github.com/NethServer/dev/issues?utf8=%E2%9C%93&q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3Abug>`_
- Discussions around `possible bugs <http://community.nethserver.org/c/bug>`_

Major changes on 2024-01-XX
===========================

**Stable release**

- **Subscription** -- Nethesis Enterprise and Subscription plans are now
  available for NS8. See the details in :ref:`subscription-section` page.

- **Cockpit removed from pre-built image** -- Cockpit is not required to
  run NS8, therefore it is no more available in the NS8 pre-built image.
  If desired, it can be manually installed and enabled with the following
  commands: ::

    dnf install -y cockpit
    systemctl enable --now cockpit.socket

  Note that the default Cockpit configuration forbids `root` access.
  Instead of accessing with `root` credentials, enable the `rocky` user
  (member of the `wheel` group) by setting a password for it: ::

    passwd rocky

  Use `rocky` credentials to access cockpit on HTTP port 9090, then enable
  the Cockpit administrative access. Any other member of the system group
  `wheel` can be used in place of `rocky`: it is a good security practice
  to avoid shared credentials among the group of system administrators.

Known issues:

- **Core upgrade freezes Software Center page** -- The bug 6778 has been
  fixed in core version 2.2.6. If the upgrade from RC1 starts from core
  version 2.2.5 or lower, when the task progress bar freezes reload the
  web page with ``CTRL + SHIFT + R`` or an equivalent procedure.


Major changes on 2023-11-21
===========================

**Release Candidate 1**

New features introduced by RC1 are:

- **Password policy** -- Added a new configuration option to the ``Domains
  and users`` page. It is possible to modify the password complexity and
  expiration policies of Samba and OpenLDAP domains. Beta 2 installations
  with OpenLDAP domains require to run a manual procedure to enable the
  password policy. The upgrade procedure is detailed in the next notes.
  See also :ref:`password-policy-section`.

- **User portal** -- Users of a domain can now access a web page to change
  their own password. The user portal is available at
  ``https://IP_OR_FQDN/users-admin/DOMAIN_NAME/``; a full link is shown in
  the ``Domains and users`` page, under the domain configuration settings.
  Beta 2 installations require to run a manual procedure to enable the
  user portal. See the upgrade procedure for Samba and OpenLDAP in the
  next notes, and the :ref:`user-management-portal-section` page.

- **Backup repositories** -- Beside existing cloud protocols, it is now
  easier to send backups to some local device. A backup repository can now
  be created in a *Windows file share* or in a *Local storage*, like a
  disk attached to a cluster node. See :ref:`backup-restore-section`
  for more information.

- **Fetch mail from other servers** -- :ref:`imapsync-section` is a new
  advanced application designed to retrieve email messages from remote
  IMAP servers at scheduled intervals and to synchronize entire IMAP
  accounts.

- **Mirror list for Rocky Linux nodes** -- If Rocky Linux is the node OS
  distribution, the default DNF configuration is overridden and mirrors
  are returned by ``mirrorlist.nethserver.org``. RPM packages from Rocky
  Linux will be hosted by NethServer specific mirrors in future releases.

Upgrade of existing Beta 2 installations can be started from the Software
center page as usual. After the core components are up-to-date, run the
following manual procedures to complete the upgrade.

- **Core upgrade procedure** -- To upgrade Beta 2 installations run the
  following command on the leader node. It defines the new ``tunadm``
  authorization role, available on new installations since core version
  2.1.0: ::

    redis-cli --raw hvals cluster/module_node | sort -n | uniq | xargs -I NODE_ID -- redis-cli SADD node/NODE_ID/roles/tunadm add-tun remove-tun add-public-service remove-public-service add-custom-zone remove-custom-zone

  For each cluster node, enable the local WebDAV service for backups: ::

    systemctl enable --now rclone-webdav.service

  Finally, only for Rocky Linux nodes, enable the NethServer default
  repositories: ::

    cp -v /etc/nethserver/nethserver.repo /etc/yum.repos.d/nethserver.repo
    dnf config-manager --save --set-disabled appstream baseos extras

- **Samba upgrade procedure** -- To upgrade Beta 2 installations run the
  following procedure for each Samba account provider instance. The list
  of instances can be obtained from the ``Domains and users`` page, under
  the domain configuration settings; **annotate for each provider**:

  * the module ID (string), for example ``samba1``
  * the node ID (number), for example ``1``
  * a free TCP port number, generated by executing on the leader node a command
    like this: ::

      node_id=1
      echo $((`redis-cli --raw INCR node/${node_id}/tcp_ports_sequence` - 1))

    In the above example set ``node_id`` with the correct node ID (number).
    Let's assume the above command prints the port number below: ::

      20013

  With the above annotations, run the following steps for each provider:

  1. Log on the cluster node where the provider instance runs.

  2. Apply the TCP port configuration and start the user portal service: ::

      runagent -m samba1 python3 - 20013 <<'EOF'
      import agent, os, sys
      user_portal_port = sys.argv[1]
      agent.assert_exp(int(user_portal_port) > 0, "ERROR: Bad TCP port argument")
      agent.assert_exp("IPADDRESS" in os.environ, "ERROR: Samba is not configured")
      agent.assert_exp(not "TCP_PORT" in os.environ, "ERROR: TCP_PORT is already set")
      os.environ["TCP_PORT"] = user_portal_port
      agent.set_env("TCP_PORT", user_portal_port)
      os.execl("../actions/configure-module/80start_amld", "80start_amld")
      EOF

- **OpenLDAP upgrade procedure** -- To upgrade Beta 2 installations run the
  following procedure for each OpenLDAP account provider instance. The list
  of instances can be obtained from the ``Domains and users`` page, under
  the domain configuration settings; **annotate for each provider**:

  * the module ID (string), for example ``openldap1``
  * the node ID (number), for example ``1``
  * a free TCP port number, generated by executing on the leader node a command
    like this: ::

      node_id=1
      echo $((`redis-cli --raw INCR node/${node_id}/tcp_ports_sequence` - 1))

    In the above example set ``node_id`` with the correct node ID (number).
    Let's assume the above command prints the port number below: ::

      20014

  With the above annotations, run the following steps for each provider:

  1. Log on the cluster node where the provider instance runs.

  2. Apply the TCP port configuration and start the user portal service: ::

      runagent -m openldap1 python3 - 20014 <<'EOF'
      import agent, os, sys
      user_portal_port = sys.argv[1]
      agent.assert_exp(int(user_portal_port) > 0, "ERROR: Bad TCP port argument")
      agent.assert_exp("LDAP_IPADDR" in os.environ, "ERROR: OpenLDAP is not configured")
      agent.assert_exp(not "," in os.environ["TCP_PORTS"], "ERROR: unexpected TCP_PORTS value")
      os.environ["TCP_PORTS"] = f'{os.environ["TCP_PORT"]},{user_portal_port}'
      agent.set_env("TCP_PORTS", os.environ["TCP_PORTS"])
      os.execl("../actions/configure-module/80start_amld", "80start_amld")
      EOF

  After repeating the above steps on each cluster node, run the following
  commands in one instance of your choice (the example is for
  ``openldap1``): ::

    runagent -m openldap1 podman exec -i openldap ash -c 'envsubst | ldapmodify -c ' <<'EOF'
    dn: olcDatabase={2}mdb,cn=config
    changetype: modify
    delete: olcAccess
    -
    add: olcAccess
    olcAccess: to attrs=userPassword by dn.base="
     gidNumber=101+uidNumber=100,cn=peercred,cn=external,cn=aut
     h" write by set="[cn=domain admins,ou=Groups,${LDAP_SUFFIX}
     ]/memberUid & user/uid" write by self write by * auth
    olcAccess: to * by dn.base="gidNumber=101+uidNumber=100,
     cn=peercred,cn=external,cn=auth" manage by set="[cn=do
     main admins,ou=Groups,${LDAP_SUFFIX}
     ]/memberUid & user/uid" write by * read

    dn: olcOverlay={1}ppolicy,olcDatabase={2}mdb,cn=config
    changetype: modify
    replace: olcPPolicyCheckModule
    olcPPolicyCheckModule: ppcheck.so

    dn: cn=default,ou=PPolicy,${LDAP_SUFFIX}
    changetype: modify
    add: objectClass
    objectClass: pwdPolicyChecker

    dn: cn=default,ou=PPolicy,${LDAP_SUFFIX}
    changetype: modify
    replace: pwdCheckQuality
    pwdCheckQuality: 2
    -
    replace: pwdMinAge
    pwdMinAge: 0
    -
    replace: pwdMaxAge
    pwdMaxAge: 15552000
    -
    replace: pwdMinLength
    pwdMinLength: 8
    -
    replace: pwdInHistory
    pwdInHistory: 12
    -
    replace: pwdLockout
    pwdLockout: FALSE
    -
    replace: pwdUseCheckModule
    pwdUseCheckModule: TRUE
    -
    replace: pwdCheckModuleArg
    pwdCheckModuleArg: default
    -
    replace: pwdExpireWarning
    pwdExpireWarning: 0
    EOF

    runagent -m openldap1 systemctl --user restart openldap

- **Mattermost upgrade procedure** -- Mattermost upgrade must be completed
  manually to allocate and open UDP ports required by the Calls plugin.
  From the ``Software center`` page, ensure Mattermost is at version
  ``2.0.0``. Then clone the running instance and after clone is complete,
  remove the old instance.

Major changes on 2023-09-13
===========================

**Beta 2**

- **Pre-built image** -- Images are based on Rocky Linux. Available
  formats are ``.qcow2`` for QEMU/Proxmox and ``.vmdk`` for VMware. See
  :ref:`install_image-section` for image download links.

- **FQDN requirement** -- The cluster creation procedure now asks to
  review and set the current system host name. The host name is expected
  in short form (a single word, with no domain suffix). The procedure also
  asks for the domain suffix and fixes the ``/etc/hosts`` file by adding a record to properly resolve the
  fully qualified domain name of the system (FQDN). For example ::

    127.0.1.1 node1.example.org node1

  See also :ref:`dns-reqs`.

- **WireGuard port 55820** -- The UDP port used by WireGuard in the
  creation of the cluster VPN is now fixed to ``55820``. Clusters already
  created with a custom port number must be fixed manually before updating
  the core to Beta 2. For example if the custom port is ``55821`` run on
  the leader node the following steps to fix it.

  1. Fix the VPN public endpoint address in Redis. For example, if the
     leader node is ``1`` and its FQDN is ``node1.example.org`` ::

      redis-cli hset node/1/vpn endpoint node1.example.org:55820

  2. Fix the firewall configuration ::

      firewall-cmd --permanent --service=ns-wireguard --remove-port=55821/udp
      firewall-cmd --permanent --service=ns-wireguard --add-port=55820/udp
      firewall-cmd --reload

  3. Change the running WireGuard listen port ::

      wg set wg0 listen-port 55820

  4. Make the change permanent, by setting ``ListenPort = 55820`` in
     ``/etc/wireguard/wg0.conf`` ::

      sed -ir 's/ListenPort.*/ListenPort = 55820/' /etc/wireguard/wg0.conf

  Repeat steps 2-4 on each worker node, too.

- **Debian upgrade** -- After running the core update, installations based
  on Debian 11 (Bullseye) must be manually upgraded to distribution
  version 12 (Bookworm).  ::

    rm -f '/etc/apt/sources.list.d/devel:kubic:libcontainers:stable.list'
    sed -i 's/bullseye/bookworm/' /etc/apt/sources.list
    apt update && apt full-upgrade -y

  Follow also the instructions for Python 3.11 upgrade, then **reboot the
  system**. Apply the same procedure for each cluster node.

- **Python 3.11** -- After running the core update, installations based on
  Rocky Linux (and other EL-like distributions) must manually install
  Python 3.11: ::

     dnf install python3.11

  The following Bash script is required by Debian, too. Do not forget the round brackets! ::

    (
        set -e -x
        core_dir=/usr/local/agent/pyenv
        mv -v ${core_dir} ${core_dir}.bak
        python3.11 -mvenv ${core_dir} --upgrade-deps --system-site-packages
        ${core_dir}/bin/pip3 install -r /etc/nethserver/pyreq3_11.txt
        echo "/usr/local/agent/pypkg" >$(${core_dir}/bin/python3 -c "import sys; print(sys.path[-1] + '/pypkg.pth')")
        rm -rf ${core_dir}.bak
    )

  Check if the Python upgrade was successfull: ::

    runagent python3 --version # output should be 3.11

  Apply the same procedure for each cluster node.

- **UI security enhancements** -- Since the Beta 1 release an important
  security update has been released, and other security improvements are
  now available.  After running the core update, do an hard browser page
  reload with ``CTRL + Shift + R`` or any other equivalent method.

- **Logs backend improved** -- The Logs page backend has been improved to
  be faster and more accurate in capturing the logs of every cluster
  component. The core module now runs Promtail as a system service. After
  running the core update, it is safe to uninstall Promtail core modules
  by running this command on the leader node: ::

    api-cli run list-installed-modules | jq -r '.["ghcr.io/nethserver/promtail"] | .[].id' | xargs -l remove-module --no-preserve

  Note that the new Logs page cannot access old log entries. To see log
  entries before the Beta 2 upgrade, use the `logcli` command.

- **TLS certificate upload** -- The ``TLS certificates`` card under the
  ``Settings`` page was extended to allow the upload of a certificate and
  the private key associated to it. See the section
  :ref:`certificate_manager-section`.

- **Additional backup providers** -- Backup repositories can be created
  also on Microsoft Azure and S3-compatible cloud storage providers.

- **New Traefik configuration backend** -- The cluster Redis DB is not
  used any more by Traefik module instances as their dynamic configuration
  backend. Traefik configuration is now entirely stored under the module
  home directory. To improve Redis performance it is possible to disable a
  feature specific for Traefik with the following commands: ::

    podman exec redis sed -i.beta1 '/^notify-keyspace-events / d' /data/etc/redis.conf
    systemctl restart redis

  Apply the same procedure for each cluster node.

- **Mail module improvements**

  1. New installations of the Mail module have the ``Shared seen`` option
     enabled by default. Existing installations will find the switch
     disabled. See also the section about :ref:`settings for mailboxes
     <mail-mailboxes-settings>`.

  2. Added the open source Dovecot plugin *Flatcurve* to enable full text
     search (FTS) of email messages.  To massively rebuild the search
     indexes run the following command during system idle time: ::

       podman exec dovecot sh -c "doveadm index -A -q '*' ; pgrep indexer-worker | xargs -- renice"

     Only PDF attachments and the email itself are added to the index.
     In future releases more attachment formats will be supported.


Major changes on 2023-05-10
===========================

**Beta 1**

Main core features include:

- Node management: add and remove nodes from the system
- Centralized logging: collect all logs in one place for easy monitoring
- Configuration and data backups: regularly save cluster settings and application data to remote providers like Amazon S3 and Backblaze B2
- Authentication: support for both Active Directory and LDAP (RFC2307) user directories
- File server: implement an SMB (Server Message Block) file server that enables seamless integration with Windows-based networks
- Auditing: track changes made within the system to ensure security and accountability
- Email relay: use a smart host to route outgoing emails  through a trusted server
- Custom web routing: define custom URLs to handle specific requests
- Multi-factor authentication: enable two-step verification for administrator accounts
- Built-in firewall: protect against unauthorized access at the network level by implementing a local firewall
- Migration: :ref:`Cockpit module <migration-section>` to import NethServer 7 applications

Additional modules:

- Collaborative tools: includes Dovecot/Postfix/Rspamd mail server, WebTop, Roundcubemail, Nextcloud, Collabora Online, Dokuwiki, ejabberd, Mattermost
- Development utilities: features MariaDB and NGINX web server for creating dynamic applications and services
- Monitoring and analysis: offers Grafana, Prometheus, and node_exporter for tracking performance metrics and identifying potential issues
- Data storage: offers MinIO for managing large amounts of structured and unstructured data
- Network defense: implements CrowdSec for protecting local applications against remote attacks

The following known limitations will be resolved in future updates:

- currently, the system only uses TLS certificates issued by Let's Encrypt or self-signed certificates generated locally
- user login is not supported on worker nodes
- the mail module does not offer sender-based or destination-based message relay options
- only a limited number of cloud storage providers are available for backing up data

Releases glossary
=================

The software release cycle includes four stages: Alpha, Beta, Release Candidate (RC), and Stable.

During the **Alpha** stage, the software is not thoroughly tested and may not include all planned features.
This release is not suitable for production environments. However, it can be used to preview what's coming in the upcoming version.
Please note that updates from an Alpha release to other releases are not supported.

The **Beta** stage indicates that the software is mostly feature complete, but it may still contain many known and unknown bugs.
This release should not be used on production environments. However, it can be used to test the software before deploying it to production.
Updates from a Beta release to an RC or Stable release are supported but may require a manual procedure.

During the **Release Candidate (RC)** stage, the software is feature complete, and it contains no known bugs.
If no major issues arise, it can be promoted to Stable. Updates from an RC release to a Stable release are supported
and should be almost automatic.
However, if you're new to the software, it's best to use it in production only if you already have some experience with it.

The **Stable** release is the most reliable and safe to use in production environments.
It has been thoroughly tested and is considered to be free of major bugs.
